Police arrest man in his 30s after fifth random knife attack in Edmonton in space of just four days left victim fighting for life
Victim was walking with a friend in Edmonton in early hours when he was knifed
Condition believed to be life-threatening but his friend was unharmed 
Today police have arrested a man in his thirties in connection with fifth attack 
Comes after four people were stabbed 'at random' in north London last weekend 
Two men arrested for GBH in connection with the stabbings remain in custody

Police have arrested a man after the fifth knife attack in Edmonton in just four days this morning - one street away from the scene of the first attack. 

The victim, believed to be in his thirties, was walking with a friend in Fairfield Road, Edmonton just after 5am today when he was attacked.

Emergency services were scrambled to nearby Aberdeen Road where they found him suffering 'life-threatening' injuries. He is currently in hospital in a 'critical but stable condition'. His friend was unharmed. 

A man in his thirties was arrested in connection with today's attack and is being held in custody, police confirmed, but said they are keeping an 'open mind' as to whether it is linked to the other four. 

Two other men arrested for GBH in connection with the first four stabbings are still in custody. 

Today's attack comes after four people were 'attacked at random' by a knifeman on a 14-hour rampage in the same area of north London over the weekend.  

Three men aged between 23 and 52 and a 45-year-old woman were stabbed as they walked alone in Edmonton on Saturday night and Sunday morning. 

The female victim, who is still fighting for her life in hospital, was attacked in Aberdeen Road - one street down from where today's attack took place. 

Terrified locals spoke of the disturbing rate of near-fatal incidents in the area over the period of just four days. 

Police have said the latest attack has 'not yet been formally linked' to the other four, but the culprit in all five is a 'tall, skinny black man' believed to be suffering from mental health issues.  There is nothing to suggest the attacks are terror related.    

Timeline of stabbings
Saturday March 30

7.02pm: A woman, aged 45, is left in a  'critical condition' after she is knifed in the back in Aberdeen Road, Edmonton.

Sunday March 31

00.15am: A man is stabbed in Park Avenue and rushed to hospital with non-life threatening wounds.

3.55am: A 23-year-old man is stabbed in Silver Street, Edmonton, before being found at Seven Sisters Tube station.

9.43am: A man is knifed in the back in  Brettenham Road in another 'bloodbath attack'.

Tuesday, April 2

5.05pm: A man, in his 30s, is found with knife injuries in Aberdeen Road, Edmonton after being stabbed in Fairfield Road.

The Metropolitan Police refused to comment when asked by MailOnline whether the first two men to be taken into custody will be released following the fifth stabbing and a third arrest. 

Video footage shows a man being arrested outside a Lidl supermarket in Edmonton Green at 10am today.   

Shop worker Fatma Oruc, 17, said: 'There were police officers surrounding a man and he was black. He was wearing a hoodie.

'They stayed for five to 10 minutes and handcuffed him and he was taken away.'

She said the man was standing up and seemed calm. Police would not confirm whether the arrest was connected to today's stabbing. 

Despite the three arrests, neighbours say they are still frightened to walk around the area alone.  

Tarek Elmadkhoun, 32, said this morning: 'It happened just outside my door. My wife heard some talking at 5am. She's a bit worried.

'I just moved here one week ago. To be honest it's a bit worrying. My wife doesn't speak English. She doesn't know what to do.' 

Kelvin Ojo, 36, added: 'It's scary now, this is not normal. They can't find this person, it's just one guy.

Police officers and a forensic investigator are pictured in Aberdeen Road, Edmonton today where a man was found stabbed in the early hours of Tuesday	+20
Police officers and a forensic investigator are pictured in Aberdeen Road, Edmonton today where a man was found stabbed in the early hours of Tuesday 

'It's been peaceful for a while until all this drama started coming up. Now I'm starting thinking about moving from this area, I'm not liking it.

'It could happen to anyone - my friends, my family, it could happen to me. It's really scary.

'We don't even know this guy they are talking about, so it's really scary.' 

A large police cordon is in place blocking off several streets in the area, with uniformed officers standing guard.

Investigators in forensic suits are taking photographs of the area and looking for clues. 

Forensic teams are pictured scouring the street where today's victim was found with knife wounds	+20
Forensic teams are pictured scouring the street where today's victim was found with knife wounds

Police officers and forensic teams (pictured) are working to see if today's stabbing is linked to the other four over the weekend	+20
Police officers and forensic teams (pictured) are working to see if today's stabbing is linked to the other four over the weekend 

Forensic investigators scour the scene of today's stabbing for clues this morning	+20
Forensic investigators scour the scene of today's stabbing for clues this morning 

A black jacket, metallic blanket and medical equipment marks the scene in Aberdeen Road, where the victim was found. 

On Lawrence Road, which is a short distance from the scene of the latest stabbing, there was also a police cordon guarded by uniformed officers while a police dog was led round an adjacent park.

It was unclear what the latest police activity related to. 

Mike Kalongi, 28, who lives near the scene of the stabbing, said: 'It's getting a bit close.

'It's a bit scary. I usually go to the gym at night, but over the last few days I decided not to.

'I'm going shopping. I usually have my headphones on but I want to stay aware and try not to be a victim. It's scary. It's really scary.'

'Police evidence' bags are pictured in the street in Aberdeen Road where a man was found stabbed this morning in Edmonton, north London	+20
'Police evidence' bags are pictured in the street in Aberdeen Road where a man was found stabbed this morning in Edmonton, north London 

Forensic evidence is pictured in a bag next to a roll of police cordon tape in Aberdeen Road	+20
Forensic evidence is pictured in a bag next to a roll of police cordon tape in Aberdeen Road 

Connor McCoy, 21, who also lives close to today's stabbing, said: 'I presume it's a follow-on from what happened prior.

'I just hope they catch the guy and it gets prevented.'

Mr McCoy said he still feels safe in the area, but added: 'I just hope that the slightly more defenceless people can feel safe living in this street.

'I hope that something happens, something to deal with knife crime.' 

Sham Povunash, 17, added that the stabbings came as a shock to residents of an area he described as 'quiet'.

He said: 'The gangs don't come here, this is a really quiet area - it's not dangerous at all. It seems random.' 

Police officers are pictured in Aberdeen Road, Edmonton, this morning where a man was found stabbed in the early hours	+20
Police officers are pictured in Aberdeen Road, Edmonton, this morning where a man was found stabbed in the early hours 

A Met Police spokesman said this afternoon: 'Police investigating a stabbing in Fairfield Road in Enfield this morning have made an arrest.

'A man aged in his 30s was arrested in the Edmonton Green area this morning.

'He has been taken into custody at a north London police station.

'At this time police retain an open mind as to whether this incident is linked to the incidents in Enfield over the weekend.

'Police advise members of the public to remain vigilant and report any suspicious activity to police.'

Today's assault follows a fatal knife attack in Kentish Town, north London at 8.30pm last night.

A murder probe has been launched after the victim, a man in his twenties, died in the 32nd homicide London has seen so far this year.  

A man in his thirties was stabbed in Aberdeen Road (pictured) in the early hours of this morning - after a woman, 45, was knifed there over the weekend	+20
A man in his thirties was stabbed in Aberdeen Road (pictured) in the early hours of this morning - after a woman, 45, was knifed there over the weekend 

Schools in Edmonton brought in extra security yesterday and police have urged anyone walking on their own through the area to take extra care.

Patrols were stepped up as detectives questioned the two men on suspicion of GBH after they issued a description of a suspect as a tall, slim black man, possibly wearing a hood.

But investigators are said to be unsure whether either of the suspects in custody is the knifeman and are therefore encouraging caution among those in the area. 

The suspect in all five attacks is described as a skinny black man who is approximately 6ft 3ins tall and wearing dark clothes. 

One suspect in custody was named locally as Mark Williams, who is in his 40s and was flagged as a risk to the local council after he was reported missing for a week.

A neighbour told how she had asked the local housing officer from Enfield Council to check on Mr Williams on Friday afternoon because she was worried – having not seen him for a week.

Others said police had repeatedly been called to his address over anti-social behaviour and concerns over large groups gathering there. 

Locals said he was known in the local area as Footsy and would often be seen walking around with a tennis racquet and a ball.

Yesterday morning, a Section 60 order was put in place, allowing officers to stop and search anyone in the area to prevent further violence. This lasted until 1.50am today.

A Met Police spokesman said this morning: 'Officers were called at approximately 05:05hrs on Tuesday, 2 April to reports of a man stabbed in Aberdeen Road, N18.

'Police and London Ambulance Service attended and found a man, believed to be aged in his 30s, suffering a stab injury.

'He is reported to have been walking with a companion when he was attacked in Fairfield Road. The victim then made his way to Aberdeen Road, where he was found by police.

'The other person did not suffer any injuries. The suspect is described as a tall, skinny black man, wearing a hoody.

'The victim has been taken to an east London hospital; at this time his condition is being treated as life-threatening.' 

Today's stabbing follows a fatal knife attack in Kentish Town, north London, which saw a man in his twenties murdered	+20
Today's stabbing follows a fatal knife attack in Kentish Town, north London, which saw a man in his twenties murdered 

A murder probe is underway after yet another fatal stabbing on the capital's streets which saw a man in his 20s knifed to death in Kentish Town, north London	+20
A murder probe is underway after yet another fatal stabbing on the capital's streets which saw a man in his 20s knifed to death in Kentish Town, north London 

Detective Superintendent Luke Marks, of the North Area Command Unit, added: 'I am aware that events from the weekend have caused a huge amount of worry and concern among the community, and that this incident will cause further alarm.

'While at this stage the incident has not yet been formally linked, the location and manner of this attack will be of concern to the public. 

'Our advice continues that the public remain vigilant, and to contact police regarding anyone acting suspiciously. 

'You will see additional uniformed patrols in the Edmonton area; if you have any concerns, please speak with my officers immediately.' 

The first attack happened around 7pm on Saturday, with a 45-year-old woman stabbed in the back by a man.

She is the most seriously injured and police described her condition as 'critical'.

Crime scene: Plumber Roger Blackman (pictured right) helps police officers at the scene of the fourth Edmonton stabbing on Sunday	+20
Crime scene: Plumber Roger Blackman (pictured right) helps police officers at the scene of the fourth Edmonton stabbing on Sunday 

Forensics experts work at the scene of all four attacks yesterday as the investigation continues	+20
Forensics experts work at the scene of all four attacks yesterday as the investigation continues

The second assault happened shortly after midnight that night, with a 52-year-old man attacked on nearby Park Avenue. He was rushed to hospital but has since been discharged, police revealed yesterday morning.

The third attack happened near Seven Sisters tube station shortly before 4am on Sunday, with a 23-year-old man injured. He remains in a 'critical but stable condition'.

The fourth attack happened around 9.45am on Sunday, with a 29-year-old male victim also stabbed in the back. He remains in hospital but doctors expect him to survive his injuries.

The fifth attack took place at 5.05am on Tuesday in Fairfield Road, Edmonton. The victim was a man in his thirties who was walking alone with a friend.

He stumbled to nearby Aberdeen Road where he was found by police. He is in hospital in a life-threatening condition. His friend was unharmed.  

A victim's belongings and medical paraphernalia was strewn across the scene of another Edmonton stabbing in Fore Street	+20
A victim's belongings and medical paraphernalia was strewn across the scene of another Edmonton stabbing in Fore Street 

Local plumber Roger Blackman was first on the scene of the fourth stabbing and saw the attacker run off, leaving the victim with blood pouring from a wound.

Speaking to MailOnline on Sunday night, he said: 'I heard a scream, I looked to my right, I saw a guy run off, then another scream. I saw blood pouring out of the back of him, I went to my van to get some towels to stem the flow.

'I saw the guy turn around and run off, he was literally about 10-15 feet away from where I was. I was in the back of my van so I'm always aware of what's going on around me.

'The victim was screaming, oh my God, oh my God, why has this happened to me. There was blood pouring out of his gash. It was a great big gash, about a three-inch wound.

'I was visiting my mum for mother's day. You hear about it in the papers and now it's happened in front of your mother's house. It does make you wonder, it makes you think about going out.'  

Residents of the area say they have been left scared to go out alone following the attacks. Part of the police cordon is pictured yesterday	+20
Residents of the area say they have been left scared to go out alone following the attacks. Part of the police cordon is pictured yesterday 

Opening a summit in Downing Street yesterday morning, Prime Minister Theresa May said tackling knife violence is a 'priority' for ministers as well as families, young people and communities across the country.

More than 100 experts will meet this week after the Government unveiled new plans which could see frontline workers in schools, hospitals and police stations accountable for failing to 'spot warning signs' of violent crime among young people.

Home Secretary Sajid Javid floated the idea of a so-called 'public health duty' intended to help spot the warning signs that a young person could be in danger, 'such as presenting in A&E with a suspicious injury, to worrying behaviour at school or issues at home'.

He stepped up stop and search operations following a week-long crackdown on knife crime known as Operation Sceptre.  