Police investigating after Jordan Pickford allegedly involved in fracas
• Northumbria police say enquiries are ongoing 
• Club also open an internal investigation into events

Press Association and Andy Hunter

Tue 2 Apr 2019 11.17 BST First published on Mon 1 Apr 2019 19.19 BST
Shares
190
 Everton have opened an internal investigation after Jordan Pickford was allegedly involved in an incident in Sunderland on Sunday evening.
 Police are investigating after Jordan Pickford was allegedly involved in an incident in Sunderland on Sunday evening. Photograph: Tony McArdle/Everton FC via Getty Images
Northumbria police are investigating an alleged incident involving England goalkeeper Jordan Pickford in Sunderland. A video circulated online allegedly shows the Everton player at the centre of a street brawl.

It was captured in the hours after Pickford’s former club Sunderland lost to Portsmouth on penalties in the Checkatrade Trophy final on Sunday.


Premier League: 10 talking points from the weekend’s action
 Read more
Northumbria police said: “At 12:19am on Monday, April 1, police received a report of a disturbance involving a large group of individuals on Tunstall Road, Sunderland. Enquiries are ongoing to determine the circumstances surrounding the incident and locate those involved.

“Nobody is believed to have been seriously injured and no arrests have been made.”

In the video, onlookers can be heard shouting “Jordan” as a fight breaks out 
before the man, believed to be Pickford, is dragged away.

Pickford was in his home city on a day off following Everton’s victory at West Ham on Saturday. His club have opened an internal investigation into events, only weeks after the manager, Marco Silva, said the 25-year-old needed to improve his “emotional balance” following an erratic display against Newcastle.

A statement released by Everton read: “The club has been made aware of an alleged incident involving one of our players and we are looking into the matter.”


The Fiver: sign up for our daily football email.
Pickford was visiting family in Sunderland for Mother’s Day, despite having tickets to see his former club play Portsmouth at Wembley in the Checkatrade Trophy final. Having watched the game he went out with family and friends to a bar where he is understood to have been verbally abused.

According to reports, Pickford was subjected to what was described as “good-natured banter” rather than any malicious criticism of some of his recent mistakes for Everton – being told he had “small arms” and “butterfingers”. Pickford took the abuse well initially, posing for photographs while giving a V-sign to the man hurling the insults. However, at a different bar later on his fiancee was also insulted and that prompted an alleged fracas involving Pickford before he was led away by friends.

